# Introduction
Nearly half of students experiencing homelessness in Washington, DC miss at least 1 out of every 10 days of school. In interviews, families in emergency shelters cited transportation as a major barrier to school attendance while in shelter and that the existing transportation supports offered to families when they first entered shelter were insufficient.

In an effort to better support attendance for students experiencing homelessness, the DC Office of the Deputy Mayor for Education (DME), in close collaboration with the DC Department of Human Services (DHS) and The Lab @ DC, committed \\$120,000 to address transportation barriers through a pilot program called Every Ride Counts (ERC). 
ERC was designed to test the impacts of providing additional transportation support to families moving into Short-Term Family Housing.  

In the pilot, case managers offered all families with school-aged children two weeks prepaid metrorail and bus passes. 
Half of those families were then randomly-selected to receive additional “enhanced” resources. Those families received two weeks worth of fuel credits (\\$100, the equivalent of two to four tanks of gasoline) or ride-share credits (ranging from \\$100 to \\$625, depending on the number of children, age of youngest child, and estimated driving time to school) that could be used at any time over the course of the pilot. The goal of the enhanced support was to provide additional flexibility for families to get students to school. 

# Pilot Design and Implementation
The ERC pilot began in March 2019 and was originally planned to last through the close of the 2019-20 school year in June 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic, however, led to school building closures in mid-March 2020 and ended the pilot prematurely. Ultimately, we enrolled 410 students in ERC: 206 in families that received “basic” ERC of metrorail and bus passes and 204 in families that received the enhanced ERC that added fuel or ride-share credits. From these families, we analyzed the impacts on attendance, comparing the students with basic ERC to the students with enhanced ERC. 

Households, on average, were composed of 1.3 adults and 2.2 children. About a quarter (26%) had regular access to a car. On average, the students receiving ERC were 8.2 years old. In the absence of ERC, it took student’s an average of 17 minutes to drive to or from school, and an average of 45 minutes to travel by public transit. 

The primary outcome for ERC was attendance rates for 14 and 30 calendar days after enrollment. We calculated these rates as the ratio of days in which the student was present at school during those 14 or 30 days to the number of school days in those 14 and 30 days periods. 
 
Consistent with DC-wide data on students experiencing homelessness, in the 14 calendar days prior to enrolling in ERC, the average student in the pilot attended school 85% of the time. Attendance rates were similar between basic and enhanced ERC in the 30 calendar days prior to enrolling in ERC. More students who would receive enhanced ERC had 100% attendance in the 30 days prior to starting ERC than in the basic group.

# Analysis and results 
The randomized setup of ERC allowed us to analyze the impacts of providing additional, flexible transportation resources (enhanced ERC). We looked at both short-term effects (14 days, corresponding to the) and longer-term effects (30 days). We compared attendance for the 382 students for whom data were available, comparing the 193 students with metrorail and bus passes (basic ERC) to the 189 with enhanced ERC (fuel and rideshare credits). We first compared the changes in attendance rate before and after ERC within the basic and enhanced ERC groups, separately.  

In both the 14-day and then 30-day periods, the most common outcome was no change in the attendance rate, regardless of whether the student received basic or enhanced ERC. Additionally, those students that did have an attendance rate change fell more or less evenly between positive and negative changes, suggesting that enhanced ERC had little or no impact on attendance and that attendance rates were affected by other factors more strongly. The fact the most common outcome in the basic ERC group was 0 also suggests that providing a metrorail and bus passes does not have a large effect on students attendance on its own, although the ERC pilot was not designed to definitively test the effect of basic ERC on its own.

We confirmed these descriptive findings using a statistical model. Providing additional flexible transportation resources through enhanced ERC may have led to small increases in student attendance over providing the more basic metrorail and bus passes (0.8 to 2.6 percentage points in attendance rates, depending on the variables we controlled for and the 14-day or 30-day period). This effect, however, may have been due to chance and is not statistically significant.

# Conclusion
The ERC pilot showed that providing families entering Short-Term Family Housing with additional, flexible transportation options through rideshare and fuel credits leads to, at best, minor improvements in student attendance. Because of the way the pilot was designed, we cannot report definitively to the effects of providing basic ERC compared to the status quo of Kids Ride Free and Homeless Liaisons. It is possible that families received additional benefits from ERC outside of school attendance that were beyond the scope of this pilot (e.g. access to work, doctor’s appointments or groceries). The scope of the resources provided by enhanced ERC were substantial (from \\$100 up to \\$625 in value over 14 days), so these results suggest that other factors that reduce attendance may need to be addressed before transportation resources can have a larger effect for students in Short Term Family Housing sites. 
Further exploration is needed to better understand effective attendance supports for students experiencing homelessness.

